Improve basic HTML syntax learning article (#42978)
mdn/content: files/en-us/learn_web_development/core/structuring_content/basic_html_syntax/index.md

        <ul>
          <li>The anatomy of an HTML element — element, opening tag, content, closing tag, attributes.</li>
          <li>The HTML body and its purpose as a container for the page content.</li>
          <li>What void elements are, and how they differ from other elements.</li>

>           <li>The need for a doctype at the top of HTML documents, including its original intended purpose, and the fact that now it is somewhat of a historical artifact.</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          <li>The need for a doctype at the top of HTML documents, including its original intended purpose, and the fact that it is now somewhat of a historical artifact.</li>
```

## What is HTML?

{{glossary("HTML")}} (HyperText Markup Language) is a _markup language_ that tells web browsers how to structure the web pages you visit. HTML consists of a series of {{glossary("Element", "elements")}}, which you use to enclose, wrap, or _mark up_ different parts of content to make it appear or act in a certain way. The enclosing {{glossary("Tag", "tags")}} can make content into a hyperlink to link to another page, italicize words, and so on. For example, consider the following line of text:

```plain
My cat is very grumpy
```

> If we wanted the text to stand by itself, we could specify that it is a paragraph by enclosing it in paragraph ({{htmlelement("p")}}) tags:

Reviewer: FWIW It isn't clear what we mean "to stand by itself" - as compared to what?

Author: Yeah, good point, I think this can be removed. I've revised this sentence, but I've also added another example to show that we could specify that the text is a heading instead, with different tags.

The anatomy of our element is:

- **The opening tag:** This consists of the name of the element (in this example, _p_ for paragraph), wrapped in opening and closing angle brackets. This opening tag marks where the element begins or starts to take effect. In this example, it precedes the start of the paragraph text.
- **The content:** This is the content of the element. In this example, it is the paragraph text — "My cat is very grumpy".
- **The closing tag:** This is the same as the opening tag, except that it includes a forward slash before the element name. This marks where the element ends. Failing to include a closing tag is a common beginner error that can produce peculiar results.

> The complete element consists of the opening tag, followed by the content, followed by the closing tag.

Reviewer: Why is this line needed?

The following is an example of the _wrong_ way to do nesting:

```html-nolint example-bad
<p>My cat is <strong>very grumpy.</p></strong>
```

The **tags have to open and close so that they are inside or outside one another**. Because the elements overlap in the previous code block, the browser has to guess at your intent. This kind of guessing can result in unexpected results.

### Void elements

Not all elements follow the pattern of an opening tag, content, then a closing tag. Some elements consist of a single tag, which is typically used to insert/embed something in the document. Such elements are called {{glossary("void element", "void elements")}}, which means "elements that cannot contain other HTML content".

For example, the {{htmlelement("br")}} element inserts a line break into a line of text, which causes it to break onto multiple lines:

```html live-sample___void-example
<p>
  This is a single paragraph, but we are going to <br />break it onto two lines.
</p>
```

This renders as follows:

{{ EmbedLiveSample('void-example', "100%", 100) }}

> [!NOTE]

> > In some HTML examples, you'll see a `/` added at the end of a void element's tag, for example `<br />`. This is valid syntax, however, it is optional.

Author: OK. I've updated the text to make the description a bit more fuzzy, to get around the question of validity:

> In some HTML examples, you'll see a `/` added at the end of a void element's tag, for example `<br />`. This is a different style of markup syntax, which isn't wrong, but this "closing slash" is not needed.

## Attributes

Elements can also have attributes. Attributes look like this:

![paragraph tag with 'class="editor-note"' attribute emphasized](grumpy-cat-attribute-small.png)

> Attributes contain extra information about the element that isn't part of its content. The **`class`** attribute provides an identifying name that can be used used to target the element with styles (CSS) or scripting information (JavaScript).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attributes contain extra information about the element that isn't part of its content. The **`class`** attribute provides an identifying name that can be used to target the element with styles (CSS) or scripting information (JavaScript).
```

<details>
<summary>Click here to show the solution</summary>

Your finished HTML element should look something like this:

```html
<img
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/fx-nightly-512.png"
  alt="A description of the image"
  width="300" />
```

</details>

### Boolean attributes

> Sometimes you will see HTML attributes written without values. These are called [Boolean attributes](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Boolean/HTML). When a boolean attribute is written without a value, or with a value of some kind, its value is set to `true`. If an attribute is not included in an HTML tag, its value is set to `false`.

Author: updated, and tweaked a little:

> Sometimes you will see HTML attributes written without values. These are called [Boolean attributes](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Boolean/HTML). When a boolean attribute is added, its value is set to `true`, irrespective of whatever value is assigned to it (even no value). If an attribute is not included in an HTML tag, its value is set to `false`.

```html live-sample___boolean-example
<label for="first-input">This input is disabled</label>
<input id="first-input" type="text" disabled="disabled" />
<br />
```

As shorthand, it is acceptable to write the `disabled` attribute without a value:

```html live-sample___boolean-example
<label for="second-input">This input is also disabled</label>
<input id="second-input" type="text" disabled />
<br />
```

For reference, let's also provide a non-disabled `<input>` element so you can compare and contrast (note how the `disabled` inputs are somewhat greyed out in the below rendering):

```html live-sample___boolean-example
<label for="third-input">This input isn't disabled; you can type into it</label>
<input id="third-input" type="text" />
```

The above HTML snippets render like so:

{{ EmbedLiveSample('boolean-example', "100%", 100) }}

> [!NOTE]
> The {{htmlelement("label")}} elements included in the above code provide a way to associate descriptive labels with form elements. We included them because it is a best practice, and to provide some separation between the form inputs.

### Omitting quotes around attribute values

> It is OK to omit the quotes from around attribute values in certain circumstances, but it can break your markup in other circumstances, so we would advise you to **always** include the quote marks. Let's explore why.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is OK to omit the quotes from around attribute values in certain circumstances. But because this can break your markup in other circumstances, we advise you to **always** include the quote marks. Let's explore why.
```

The element in the code snippet below, {{htmlelement("a")}}, is called an **anchor**. Anchors enclose text and turn them into links. The `href` attribute specifies the URL the link points to. You can omit the quotes around the `href` attribute value shown below without any negative consequences, because it has no spaces in it:

```html
<a href=https://www.mozilla.org/>favorite website</a>
```

However, you soon run into problems when omitting quotes from attribute values _with_ spaces. Consider the `title` attribute shown below, which provides a description of the linked page ("The Mozilla homepage") that should appear as a tooltip when the link is hovered over by a mouse pointer.

```html-nolint example-bad live-sample___bad-no-quotes
<a href=https://www.mozilla.org/ title=The Mozilla homepage>favorite website</a>
```

> However, because quotes are not included around the `title` attribute value, the browser interprets it as three attributes: a `title` attribute with the value `The`, and two Boolean attributes — `Mozilla` and `homepage`. Obviously, this is not what we intended! If you're using a device with a mouse pointer, you can try hovering over the link to view the title tooltip (it will give you "The" rather than the intended "The Mozilla homepage").

Reviewer: However repeats from above, and is not needed.

```suggestion
Because quotes are not included around the `title` attribute value, the browser interprets it as three attributes: a `title` attribute with the value `The`, and two Boolean attributes — `Mozilla` and `homepage`. Obviously, this is not what we intended! If you're using a device with a mouse pointer, you can try hovering over the link to view the title tooltip (it will give you "The" rather than the intended "The Mozilla homepage").
```

</html>
```

The parts of this example are as follows:

1. `<!doctype html>`: The doctype. When HTML was young (1991-1992), doctypes were meant to act as links to a set of rules that the HTML page had to follow to be considered good HTML. Doctypes used to look something like this:

   ```html
   <!doctype html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
   ```

>    In modern times, the doctype is a historical artifact that needs to be included for everything else to work right. `<!doctype html>` is the shortest string of characters that counts as a valid doctype, and it should be included at the top of all webpages. That is all you need to know!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In modern times, the doctype is a historical artifact that needs to be included for everything else to work correctly. `<!doctype html>` is the shortest string of characters that counts as a valid doctype, and it should be included at the top of all webpages. That is all you need to know!
```

### Whitespace in HTML

> In previous examples, we've included lot of whitespace in the code. This is completely optional, and included mainly to make the code more readable. For example, these two code snippets are equivalent:

Author: I've updated this sentence, and then in the sentence below the live example I have done a complementary update that includes `<pre>` as an example of an exception.
